Hi there.
This is Dana.
And welcome back.
We know that Java is an object oriented programming language and we very well know how object oriented
programming helps model real world scenarios in a more natural way.
Right.
But there is also another programming paradigm called functional programming.
And languages like Lisp fall under functional programming.
And functional programming is all about programming using functions that is methods in our Java terminology.
Functional programming is often in short referred to as PHP, just like object oriented programming
is referred to as OOP, and PHP helps in writing compact code, more bug free code and code that is
easily parallel usable, but they may not be as good as an OOP language and implementing real world
scenarios, but they have their own advantages as I just stated, like being able to write compact bug
free and parallel code and it seems they are very good at writing compilers.
So both paradigms have their own advantages.
And so we now have languages like Scala that are multi paradigm where you can leverage the best of both
object oriented as well as functional programming.
So Java designers also realized this and they made this possible in Java eight by introducing functional
programming constructs like lambdas.
So far we were only passing primitives and object references to methods.
But with Java eight, you can also pass functions as arguments to methods.
And within those methods you can use those functions.
Functional programming constructs that we are going to learn in this chapter enable us to write more
compact and efficient.
Code on such code can also help us to very easily exploit parallelism in a multi core system.
So in this chapter we will learn about the new functional programming language features.
And in this particular lecture, we will set the scene by looking at some of the functional programming
constructs that enable us to write more elegant code.
So it's all about elegant code.
So we are going to understand the motivation behind learning about the new features instead of just
learning the syntax without understanding their real purpose.
So let's just go ahead and get started with the chapter.
As I just mentioned, prior to Java eight, we know that only primitives and object references could
be passed as arguments to methods.
But from Java eight onwards, even behavior could be parsed as argument.
That is, we can pass around method functionality and this is possible.
We are lambdas and also something called method references.
In that sense.
From Java eight onwards, methods are also considered as first class citizens.
Earlier, only primitives and object references were considered as first class citizens.
Note that although here we are talking about functions as method arguments, we can also have methods
returning functions.
Now, even before Java eight functionality could be passed, but we know that it was via objects and
especially anonymous class instances.
But anonymous classes are kind of verbose.
For instance, let's consider this example, which was taken from our discussion of anonymous sources.
Here, an anonymous object is being passed as a competitor to the constructor of preset so that it can
perform sorting.
Now the Java eight.
We can have this kind of a code where a lambda expression is used instead of the anonymous object.
Let's not worry about the syntax for now.
But we are essentially passing the body of the computer method.
So we don't have the new keyword or the comparator of string or the compare method signature itself.
As you can see, it is much more compact and cleaner and it is also efficient.
So compactness and efficiency is one benefit of using lambdas.
Now let's look at another beautiful and a more convincing example about the need for functional style
programming.
Let's say we have a list of books and we want to first filter them by ratings and then group them by
category.
So we want to group them by category.
And the result can be stored in a map such as this one, where the key is category and values would
be a list of books that fall under that category.
And this is a typical pattern that is used here.
We are iterating through all the books and we are first applying the filter.
In this case, it is rating greater than or equal to 4.5.
And if the rating is greater than or equal to 4.5, then we are getting the category of the book and
we are checking if we already added any books with that category into the map.
If not yet added, then books list here will be null.
And so we initialize it with an empty list and then we add it to the map as a value for the category.
And finally we add the book into the newly created books list.
But if there are already one or more books added for that category, then the if condition would fail
and the book is simply added into the existing list.
Now this is the typical pattern when we are grouping things by some key.
And now let's see how Java eight features would simplify this code.
So here is the same code rewritten using Java eight features and here we are using streams.
Here we are first invoking a method called stream on the books ArrayList, and next we are chaining
it with another method invocation called Filter, which basically filters out books with the rating
less than 4.5.
And the final line of code returns a map with books being grouped by category.
So here the filtering criteria is a lambda expression, and the expression used for grouping is a matter
reference.
As you can see, the code is once again compact and cleaner and efficient to both lambda expression
and reference are helping in that aspect.
The code would have been clumsy and slow had we used an anonymous class instead.
Now this style of programming where we are neatly chaining things is called less declarative programming.
And here we don't care about how things are managed underneath.
All we do is we specify the what part of the SQL queries that we write when dealing with databases also
follow such declarative style.
On the traditional code that we have here is referred to as imperative programming.
So that's some terminology for you which you will often encounter.
Now the cool thing here is if we replace stream with parallel stream method, then we will be paralysing
the whole computation by utilizing multiple cores.
And so we would have faster computation.
So that is how easy it is to make it parallelism.
And this exploitation of parallelism in such an easy way is a really great advantage to using off streams.
So we can see from this example how we can write more elegant code using Java eight features.
And let's now see what we are going to learn in this particular chapter.
So these are the main topics we are going to discuss.
We will start off by learning about lambdas.
Next, we will learn about functional interfaces as lambdas work with only functional interfaces and
as part of that we will look at some new interfaces like predicate function, consumer and supplier.
Then we will learn about method references.
And finally we will learn about streams.
And over time, I may be adding some new stuff to like best practices and stuff like that.
So that's about it.
I hope the motivation for writing functional code is fairly clear.
And now we can jump in and learn the specifics.
Okay then.
Thank you and see you in the next lecture.